---
title: Be a better developer with spaced repetition
published: true
---

Something I've heard other developers brag about is how much they google answers. The argument goes, "I only learned what a quick sort was for an interview and I've forgotten since. If I ever need to use it, I'll just google it." The idea is that _real_ engineering skills are more abstract and learned through practice and not basic recall while _fake_ engineering skills are things that you can google or look up on Stack Overflow. I'll concede that specific things aren't worth memorizing, but in general memorizing things is a valuable tool for improving my programming skills. 

I find that memorizing has two main benefits. The first is I run into fewer known unknowns and thus I'm taken out of my flow less often. Every time I have to pause what I'm writing, open up google, read something, and then switch back to my IDE is time I'm losing focus. It's like reading from a hard drive instead of RAM.

The second benefit is less obvious and deals with unknown unknowns. The more I'm able to recall from memory, the more potential solutions I have to draw from. Maybe I learned about tries once but what good is that if I don't remember it when it would be the ideal solution to a problem.

I've long been sold on using memorization to improve myself but struggled to find an effective means of committing things to memory. Then I came across the idea of _spaced repetition_. It's essentially like flashcards that repeat based on how well you remember each card. If you're struggling to remember a card, it will continue to show up. If you find a card easy it won't show up for a while, but you'll still see it again. This repetition of cards is what makes it effective at indefinite retention.

Conveniently, there's apps available for space repetition. Personally I use https://ankiweb.net because it's free, simple, and available both as a website and as a mobile app. But there's [plenty of options](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition#Implementations) out there.

When it comes to creating decks and cards, I recommend a couple of things.

#### Create a deck for each language you're using
I typically create a deck per language I'm actively working in. I'll add cards related to the language or frameworks written in that language to the deck.

#### Consider adding a card each time you look something up
Each time I catch myself googling something, I'll consider a) whether I'll ever use the knowledge again and b) whether I can capture it in card. For example, I once had to figure out how to iterate over the values in a C# enum. I created a card with the front:

    Get values of an enum

and the back:

```cs
Enum.GetValues(typeof(NameOfEnum))
```

#### Create decks for software engineering topics
I've created decks for other software engineering topics I want to have at my finger tips like [Domain Driven Development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design) or [Refactoring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_refactoring) patterns.

After a few weeks of doing this I found myself recalling a wider range of programming concepts and keywords both when writing code and when discussing solutions with co-workers. It's become up a regular tool in my self-improvement tool belt. I hope it helps you out too.